papers.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Papers, Talks and Patents
permalink: /papers/
---

* Table of contents
{:toc}

My [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/citations?hl=en&user=oT8RhJgAAAAJ),
[DBLP](http://dblp.uni-trier.de/pers/hd/r/Reid:Alastair_David),
[ORCID](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4695-6668) and
[Microsoft Academic](https://academic.microsoft.com/#/detail/2293162450)
pages.

## Papers

<table>
{% for paper in site.data.biblio %}
    <tr style="vertical-align:top">
        <td class="bibtexnumber" style="text-align:right; padding: 10px;">
            <a class="papertitle" href="{{ site.baseurl }}/papers/{{ paper.ar_file }}">{{ paper.ar_shortname | replace:' ','&nbsp;'}}</a>
        </td>
        <td class="bibtexitem">
            {{ paper.ar_title }}
        </td>
    </tr>
{% endfor %}
</table>


## Talks

<h3>Rust Verification</h3>


  - [KLEE workshop 2021](https://srg.doc.ic.ac.uk/klee21/)
    <br>
    Virtual (London, UK).
    11 June 2021.
    [[pdf]](talks/using-KLEE-with-Rust-2021-07-11.pdf)
    [[video]](https://youtu.be/zR7oDg7zix0)



<h3>The Hardware-Software Interface: Quality and Performance</h3>

_One of the most important interfaces in a computer system is the
interface between hardware and software.
This talk examines two critical aspects of defining the
hardware-software interface: quality and performance._

_The first aspect concerns the "radical" idea of creating a single,
high-quality, formal specification of microprocessors that everybody
can use.
This idea does not seem "radical" until you realize that standard
practice is for every group to create their own version of a
specification in their preferred toolchain.
I will describe the challenges that lead to this behavior and how to
overcome the challenges.
This project lead to the creation of Arm's official formal
specification of their microprocessors and to the formal validation of
Arm's processors against that specification._

_The second aspect concerns the tradeoff between portability and
performance in the context of high performance, energy efficient,
parallel systems.
I will describe the challenges in balancing portability and
performance and how I overcame them by defining the hardware-software
interface in terms of extensions of the C language.
This project played a key part in creation of a software-defined radio
system capable of implementing the 4G cellphone protocol._

_The Arm architecture is the largest computer architecture by volume in
the world; it behooves us to ensure that the interface it describes is
appropriately defined._

  - Computer Science Department, Glasgow, UK.
    21 February, 2019
    [[pdf]](/talks/hw-sw-interfaces-2019-02-21.pdf)


<h3>Engineering and Using Large Formal Specifications</h3>

_We have great tools and technique to formally verify hardware and software but,
if we are apply these to real world systems, we need high quality
specifications of real world artifacts such as processors, OSes, libraries,
programming languages and internet protocols.
This talk is about how we are going to avoid a specification bottleneck - it
uses my experience in formalising the ARM processor architecture to suggest an
approach that we can use on other large, complex hardware and software to
create the specifications we need._

  - [ACL2 2018](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/moore/acl2/workshop-2018/index.html)
    <br>
    Keynote talk,
    Austin, Texas, USA.
    5-6 November, 2018.
    [[pdf]](/talks/engineering-large-specs-ACL2-2018-11-06.pdf)

<h3>What makes processors fail - and how to prevent it</h3>

A more accessible presentation of the ideas in the [ISA-Formal paper](_papers/CAV_16.md)
for the Electromagnetic Field maker festival.

_Modern processors are amazing devices: small, fast, low power and getting
better with every generation.  But the most amazing things about modern
microprocessors is that they work so incredibly reliably despite all their
incredible complexity._

_This talk is about the battle between complexity and correctness and about how
new formal verification tools can be used to help you design higher performance
processors that actually work.  I will describe the common optimisations, the
bugs that these often introduce and how open source tools such as SAT solvers
and bounded model checkers can be used to find these bugs._

  - [Electromagnetic Field 2018](https://www.emfcamp.org/line-up/2018/417-what-makes-processors-fail-and-how-to-prevent-it)
    <br>
    Eastnor, UK.
    31 August - 2 September 2018.
    [[pdf](/talks/what-makes-processors-fail-EMF-2018-09-02.pdf)]
    [[video](https://media.ccc.de/v/emf2018-417-what-makes-processors-fail-and-how-to-prevent-it)]

<h3>Creating Formal Specifications of the Arm Processor Architecture</h3>

_A talk about why creating formal specifications for real world systems
is hard and what we can do about it.
Some of the key problems are the semantic gap between the architects’ intention
and the written specification; challenges persuading different groups to adopt
a common specification; the number and diversity of existing implementations;
and the practical impossibility of formally verifying all implementations
against the specification.
I discuss lessons learned when creating a formal specification of the Arm
Processor Architecture and using that specification to formally validate
processors against the specification.  And I discuss how those lessons can be
applied in other contexts.  This includes use of traditional testing, formal
validation, social engineering and building a virtuous cycle to drive up the
quality of the specification._

  - [Agence National de la sécurité des systèmes d'information (ANSSI)](https://www.ssi.gouv.fr/)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Paris, France.
    24 October, 2018.
    [[pdf]](/talks/creating-formal-specs-ANSSI-2018-10-24.pdf)


  - [Austrian Computer Science Day](https://arise.or.at/2018/01/austrian-computer-science-day-june-2018-salzburg/)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Salzburg, Austria.
    15 June, 2018.
    [[pdf](/talks/formalizing-arm-specs-ACSD-2018-06-15.pdf)]

  - [OAuth Security Workshop](https://st.fbk.eu/osw2018)
    <br>
    Invited keynote talk,
    Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy.
    14-16 March, 2018.
    [[pdf](/talks/real-world-artifacts-OSW-2018-03-15.pdf)]

<h3>Specifications: The Next Verification Bottleneck</h3>

_A talk about the importance and difficulty of creating trustworthy specifications of all
the software and protocols we will need to verify software and about the
techniques I used to create a trustworthy specification of the ARM processor
architecture._

  - [ENTROPY 2018: ENabling TRust through Os Proofs...and beYond](https://entropy2018.sciencesconf.org)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Villeneuve d'Ascq, France,
    25-26 January, 2018.
    [[pdf](/talks/specs-the-next-bottleneck-ENTROPY-2018-01-26.pdf)]

<h3>How can you trust formally verified software?</h3>

_A talk about practical things you can do with ARM's executable formal
specification with an emphasis on security research.
Despite having the same title, this is a completely different talk from the next one._
TUWAT!

  - [Chaos Communication Congress (34C3)](https://events.ccc.de/congress/2017/wiki/index.php/Main_Page)
    <br>
    [CCC](https://ccc.de/en/),
    Leipzig, Germany,
    27-30 December, 2017.
    [[video](https://media.ccc.de/v/34c3-8915-how_can_you_trust_formally_verified_software)]
    [[pdf](/talks/using-arm-specs-34C3-2017-12-27.pdf)]

<h3>How can you trust formally verified software?</h3>

_A gradually evolving series of talks about my work on creating
correct formal specifications (when there are multiple implementations
already in existence).
Reinforces the idea of having multiple users of a single specification and
includes a short version of the FMCAD16, CAV16 and OOPSLA17 talks._

  - High Performance Embedded and Distributed Systems (HiPEDS) seminar series
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Imperial College London, UK,
    6th November, 2017.
    [[pdf](/talks/trusting-verified-software-ICL-2017-11-06.pdf)]

  - [Formal Aspects of Computing Science (British Computer Society)](https://www.bcs.org/content/ConWebDoc/58298)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    London, UK,
    29th September, 2017.
    [[pdf](/talks/trusting-verified-software-BCS-2017-09-29.pdf)]

  - [Reliable, Secure and Scalable Software Systems (RS4) Workshop](https://www.sicsa.ac.uk/events/reliable-secure-scalable-software-systems-rs4-workshop/)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Glasgow, UK,
    1st September, 2017.
    [[pdf](/talks/trusting-verified-software-GLA-2017-09-01.pdf)]
    <br>
    (Completely rewritten from May version.)

  - Microsoft Research
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Cambridge, UK,
    22nd May, 2017.

  - [Cambridge University Computer Laboratory](http://talks.cam.ac.uk/talk/index/72325)
    <br>
    Cambridge, UK,
    2nd May, 2017.
    [[pdf](/talks/trusting-verified-software-CUCL-2017-05-02.pdf)]

  - Queen Mary University
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    London, UK,
    30th November, 2016.
    [[pdf](/talks/trustworthy-specs-QMU-2016-11-30.pdf)]

<h3>Trusting Large Specifications: The Virtuous Cycle</h3>

_First talk emphasizing the importance of having multiple users of a single
specification._

  - [The 4th South of England Regional Programming Language Seminar (S-REPLS 4)](http://srepls4.doc.ic.ac.uk/abstracts/reid/)
    <br>
    Imperial College London, UK,
    27th September, 2016.
    [[pdf](/talks/srepls4-trustworthy.pdf)]


<h3>Trustworthy Specifications of ARM System Level Architecture</h3>

  - [First Deepspec Workshop](https://deepspec.org/events/workshop2016/index.html),
    Princeton, NJ, USA,
    7th June, 2016.

<h3>Backwards compatible formalization of the ARM Architecture</h3>

_First public talk about creating formal specifications of ARM processors._

  - Cambridge University Computer Laboratory
    <br>
    Cambridge, UK,
    February, 2012.
    [[pdf](/talks/bottom-up-formalization-CUCL-2012-02.pdf)]


## Patents

<table>
{% for paper in site.data.patents %}
    <tr style="vertical-align:top">
        <td class="bibtexnumber" style="text-align:right; padding: 10px;">
            {% if paper.link %}
                <a class="papertitle" href="{{ paper.link }}">{{ paper.number | replace:' ','&nbsp;'}}</a>
            {% else %}
                {{ paper.number | replace:' ','&nbsp;'}}
            {% endif %}
        </td>
        <td class="bibtexitem">
            {{ paper.title }}
            <br>
            {{ paper.author }},
            {{ paper.location }}
            {{ paper.type }},
            {{ paper.month }}
            {{ paper.year }}
        </td>
    </tr>
{% endfor %}
</table>

Commit message:

Add building better systems podcast on papers page

papers.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Papers, Talks and Patents
permalink: /papers/
---

* Table of contents
{:toc}

My [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/citations?hl=en&user=oT8RhJgAAAAJ),
[DBLP](http://dblp.uni-trier.de/pers/hd/r/Reid:Alastair_David),
[ORCID](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4695-6668) and
[Microsoft Academic](https://academic.microsoft.com/#/detail/2293162450)
pages.

## Papers

<table>
{% for paper in site.data.biblio %}
    <tr style="vertical-align:top">
        <td class="bibtexnumber" style="text-align:right; padding: 10px;">
            <a class="papertitle" href="{{ site.baseurl }}/papers/{{ paper.ar_file }}">{{ paper.ar_shortname | replace:' ','&nbsp;'}}</a>
        </td>
        <td class="bibtexitem">
            {{ paper.ar_title }}
        </td>
    </tr>
{% endfor %}
</table>


## Talks

<h3>Rust Verification</h3>

Talks about the [Rust verification project](https://project-oak.github.io/rust-verification-tools/)
at Google.

  - Building Better Systems (Episode #11): Meeting Developers Where They Are
    <br>
    23 July 2021 (recorded 2nd February).
    [[youtube]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yXEVO-26eC8)
    [[apple podcast]](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/11-alastair-reid-meeting-developers-where-they-are/id1537190695?i=1000529842759)
    [[simplecast]](https://building-better-systems.simplecast.com/episodes/11-alastair-reid-meeting-developers-where-they-are-TSRN2M5n)
    [[mp3]](https://cdn.simplecast.com/audio/83a96719-0b3a-4a2c-b6ef-4cbfc1905808/episodes/1b616260-3607-44c2-807a-117160a33368/audio/d5b73395-8453-42f6-a66b-1516814cf77f/default_tc.mp3)
    [[transcript]](https://building-better-systems.simplecast.com/episodes/11-alastair-reid-meeting-developers-where-they-are-TSRN2M5n/transcript)

    This 36 minute interview with Joey Dodds and Shpat Morina at Galois focuses on adoption and usability of verification tools
    and where we sit on the spectrum from high-assurance/high-cost to lower-assurance/lower-cost.


  - Using KLEE with Large Rust Programs
    <br>
    [KLEE workshop 2021](https://srg.doc.ic.ac.uk/klee21/)
    <br>
    Virtual (London, UK).
    11 June 2021.
    [[pdf]](talks/using-KLEE-with-Rust-2021-07-11.pdf)
    [[video]](https://youtu.be/zR7oDg7zix0)

    This 12 minute talk focuses on tools: what we have done to adapt KLEE for use with Rust;
    the language, compiler, library and linker features we have encountered in real
    code out in the wild;
    and how we have tried to solve issues in a way that other Rust verification tools can directly use or adapt.


<h3>The Hardware-Software Interface: Quality and Performance</h3>

_One of the most important interfaces in a computer system is the
interface between hardware and software.
This talk examines two critical aspects of defining the
hardware-software interface: quality and performance._

_The first aspect concerns the "radical" idea of creating a single,
high-quality, formal specification of microprocessors that everybody
can use.
This idea does not seem "radical" until you realize that standard
practice is for every group to create their own version of a
specification in their preferred toolchain.
I will describe the challenges that lead to this behavior and how to
overcome the challenges.
This project lead to the creation of Arm's official formal
specification of their microprocessors and to the formal validation of
Arm's processors against that specification._

_The second aspect concerns the tradeoff between portability and
performance in the context of high performance, energy efficient,
parallel systems.
I will describe the challenges in balancing portability and
performance and how I overcame them by defining the hardware-software
interface in terms of extensions of the C language.
This project played a key part in creation of a software-defined radio
system capable of implementing the 4G cellphone protocol._

_The Arm architecture is the largest computer architecture by volume in
the world; it behooves us to ensure that the interface it describes is
appropriately defined._

  - Computer Science Department, Glasgow, UK.
    21 February, 2019
    [[pdf]](/talks/hw-sw-interfaces-2019-02-21.pdf)


<h3>Engineering and Using Large Formal Specifications</h3>

_We have great tools and technique to formally verify hardware and software but,
if we are apply these to real world systems, we need high quality
specifications of real world artifacts such as processors, OSes, libraries,
programming languages and internet protocols.
This talk is about how we are going to avoid a specification bottleneck - it
uses my experience in formalising the ARM processor architecture to suggest an
approach that we can use on other large, complex hardware and software to
create the specifications we need._

  - [ACL2 2018](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/moore/acl2/workshop-2018/index.html)
    <br>
    Keynote talk,
    Austin, Texas, USA.
    5-6 November, 2018.
    [[pdf]](/talks/engineering-large-specs-ACL2-2018-11-06.pdf)

<h3>What makes processors fail - and how to prevent it</h3>

A more accessible presentation of the ideas in the [ISA-Formal paper](_papers/CAV_16.md)
for the Electromagnetic Field maker festival.

_Modern processors are amazing devices: small, fast, low power and getting
better with every generation.  But the most amazing things about modern
microprocessors is that they work so incredibly reliably despite all their
incredible complexity._

_This talk is about the battle between complexity and correctness and about how
new formal verification tools can be used to help you design higher performance
processors that actually work.  I will describe the common optimisations, the
bugs that these often introduce and how open source tools such as SAT solvers
and bounded model checkers can be used to find these bugs._

  - [Electromagnetic Field 2018](https://www.emfcamp.org/line-up/2018/417-what-makes-processors-fail-and-how-to-prevent-it)
    <br>
    Eastnor, UK.
    31 August - 2 September 2018.
    [[pdf](/talks/what-makes-processors-fail-EMF-2018-09-02.pdf)]
    [[video](https://media.ccc.de/v/emf2018-417-what-makes-processors-fail-and-how-to-prevent-it)]

<h3>Creating Formal Specifications of the Arm Processor Architecture</h3>

_A talk about why creating formal specifications for real world systems
is hard and what we can do about it.
Some of the key problems are the semantic gap between the architects’ intention
and the written specification; challenges persuading different groups to adopt
a common specification; the number and diversity of existing implementations;
and the practical impossibility of formally verifying all implementations
against the specification.
I discuss lessons learned when creating a formal specification of the Arm
Processor Architecture and using that specification to formally validate
processors against the specification.  And I discuss how those lessons can be
applied in other contexts.  This includes use of traditional testing, formal
validation, social engineering and building a virtuous cycle to drive up the
quality of the specification._

  - [Agence National de la sécurité des systèmes d'information (ANSSI)](https://www.ssi.gouv.fr/)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Paris, France.
    24 October, 2018.
    [[pdf]](/talks/creating-formal-specs-ANSSI-2018-10-24.pdf)


  - [Austrian Computer Science Day](https://arise.or.at/2018/01/austrian-computer-science-day-june-2018-salzburg/)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Salzburg, Austria.
    15 June, 2018.
    [[pdf](/talks/formalizing-arm-specs-ACSD-2018-06-15.pdf)]

  - [OAuth Security Workshop](https://st.fbk.eu/osw2018)
    <br>
    Invited keynote talk,
    Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy.
    14-16 March, 2018.
    [[pdf](/talks/real-world-artifacts-OSW-2018-03-15.pdf)]

<h3>Specifications: The Next Verification Bottleneck</h3>

_A talk about the importance and difficulty of creating trustworthy specifications of all
the software and protocols we will need to verify software and about the
techniques I used to create a trustworthy specification of the ARM processor
architecture._

  - [ENTROPY 2018: ENabling TRust through Os Proofs...and beYond](https://entropy2018.sciencesconf.org)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Villeneuve d'Ascq, France,
    25-26 January, 2018.
    [[pdf](/talks/specs-the-next-bottleneck-ENTROPY-2018-01-26.pdf)]

<h3>How can you trust formally verified software?</h3>

_A talk about practical things you can do with ARM's executable formal
specification with an emphasis on security research.
Despite having the same title, this is a completely different talk from the next one._
TUWAT!

  - [Chaos Communication Congress (34C3)](https://events.ccc.de/congress/2017/wiki/index.php/Main_Page)
    <br>
    [CCC](https://ccc.de/en/),
    Leipzig, Germany,
    27-30 December, 2017.
    [[video](https://media.ccc.de/v/34c3-8915-how_can_you_trust_formally_verified_software)]
    [[pdf](/talks/using-arm-specs-34C3-2017-12-27.pdf)]

<h3>How can you trust formally verified software?</h3>

_A gradually evolving series of talks about my work on creating
correct formal specifications (when there are multiple implementations
already in existence).
Reinforces the idea of having multiple users of a single specification and
includes a short version of the FMCAD16, CAV16 and OOPSLA17 talks._

  - High Performance Embedded and Distributed Systems (HiPEDS) seminar series
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Imperial College London, UK,
    6th November, 2017.
    [[pdf](/talks/trusting-verified-software-ICL-2017-11-06.pdf)]

  - [Formal Aspects of Computing Science (British Computer Society)](https://www.bcs.org/content/ConWebDoc/58298)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    London, UK,
    29th September, 2017.
    [[pdf](/talks/trusting-verified-software-BCS-2017-09-29.pdf)]

  - [Reliable, Secure and Scalable Software Systems (RS4) Workshop](https://www.sicsa.ac.uk/events/reliable-secure-scalable-software-systems-rs4-workshop/)
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Glasgow, UK,
    1st September, 2017.
    [[pdf](/talks/trusting-verified-software-GLA-2017-09-01.pdf)]
    <br>
    (Completely rewritten from May version.)

  - Microsoft Research
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    Cambridge, UK,
    22nd May, 2017.

  - [Cambridge University Computer Laboratory](http://talks.cam.ac.uk/talk/index/72325)
    <br>
    Cambridge, UK,
    2nd May, 2017.
    [[pdf](/talks/trusting-verified-software-CUCL-2017-05-02.pdf)]

  - Queen Mary University
    <br>
    Invited talk,
    London, UK,
    30th November, 2016.
    [[pdf](/talks/trustworthy-specs-QMU-2016-11-30.pdf)]

<h3>Trusting Large Specifications: The Virtuous Cycle</h3>

_First talk emphasizing the importance of having multiple users of a single
specification._

  - [The 4th South of England Regional Programming Language Seminar (S-REPLS 4)](http://srepls4.doc.ic.ac.uk/abstracts/reid/)
    <br>
    Imperial College London, UK,
    27th September, 2016.
    [[pdf](/talks/srepls4-trustworthy.pdf)]


<h3>Trustworthy Specifications of ARM System Level Architecture</h3>

  - [First Deepspec Workshop](https://deepspec.org/events/workshop2016/index.html),
    Princeton, NJ, USA,
    7th June, 2016.

<h3>Backwards compatible formalization of the ARM Architecture</h3>

_First public talk about creating formal specifications of ARM processors._

  - Cambridge University Computer Laboratory
    <br>
    Cambridge, UK,
    February, 2012.
    [[pdf](/talks/bottom-up-formalization-CUCL-2012-02.pdf)]


## Patents

<table>
{% for paper in site.data.patents %}
    <tr style="vertical-align:top">
        <td class="bibtexnumber" style="text-align:right; padding: 10px;">
            {% if paper.link %}
                <a class="papertitle" href="{{ paper.link }}">{{ paper.number | replace:' ','&nbsp;'}}</a>
            {% else %}
                {{ paper.number | replace:' ','&nbsp;'}}
            {% endif %}
        </td>
        <td class="bibtexitem">
            {{ paper.title }}
            <br>
            {{ paper.author }},
            {{ paper.location }}
            {{ paper.type }},
            {{ paper.month }}
            {{ paper.year }}
        </td>
    </tr>
{% endfor %}
</table>
