---
layout: post
title: Arm v8.3 Machine Readable Specification Released
---

Three months ago, Arm released version v8.2 of its processor architecture
specification.  Arm's release includes PDF and HTML for the specification but
what makes this specification unusual is that it includes a machine readable
spec as well.  The machine readable spec contains the instruction encodings, the system register
encodings and an executable specification (written in
[ASL]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-08-17-specification_languages %}))
of each instruction and all the
supporting code such as exception handling, interrupt handling, page table
walks, hypervisor support, debug support, etc.

To accompany that release, I wrote
[an article about the specification]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-04-20-ARM-v8a-xml-release %})
and I wrote and released [some
tools](https://github.com/alastairreid/mra_tools) to extract some of the more
useful information from the machine readable specification
and [a lexer for the language]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-05-07-asl-lexical-syntax %}).

This week, Arm released [version v8.3 of its processor architecture
specification](https://developer.arm.com/products/architecture/a-profile/exploration-tools)
including the PDF, HTML and machine readable formats.  I have updated my tools
to work with the v8.3 release.  (Warning, this means that they no longer work
with the v8.2 release.  But that's ok, it is in git so you can grab the
old version if you need it.)

So what does the v8.3 architecture add to the v8.2 architecture
and what's the holdup in me writing a parser for the ASL
language?

# What is in v8.3?

Arm described the v8.3 architecture in
[a blog post last October](https://community.arm.com/processors/b/blog/posts/armv8-a-architecture-2016-additions) so I will give a fairly brief summary.

* How can you protect against ROP/JOP attacks where attackers use buffer
  overflow attacks to load code pointers into a processor's address space?
  One solution is to authenticate all pointers used in indirect jumps such as
  return addresses.  v8.3 pointer authentication provides instructions to sign
  and check pointer values using the top bits of a 64-bit pointer to store
  a cryptographic signature.  I recommend reading Qualcomm's [whitepaper about
  pointer
  authentication](https://www.qualcomm.com/documents/whitepaper-pointer-authentication-armv83)
  for a detailed explanation of the motivation and the instructions.

* What if I want to deploy a system that uses a hypervisor in the cloud and
  the cloud provider also wants to use a hypervisor to manage their
  machines?  In v8.2, this couldn't happen but v8.3 provides
  nested virtualization to transparently run my hypervisor in EL1
  while the cloud provider runs their hypervisor in EL2.

* Ever since NEON (ARM's Advanced SIMD architecture) was first released, the
  way to manipulate complex numbers was to deinterleave them so that you have
  one register containing the real part and another register containing the
  imaginary part.  This works pretty well most of the time but it adds some
  complexity shuffling values around and it can be inefficient when handling
  short arrays of complex numbers.  v8.3 fixes this by adding new instructions
  to directly support complex multiplication and addition support.

* An instruction to convert double precision floats to integers and set flags
  if the conversion is not exact helps implement Javascript efficiently.  (In
  Javascript, all numbers are double precision floats but high performance
  Javascript implementations like to use integer operations whenever the
  inputs can be precisely represented as 32-bit integers.)

* Instructions were added to support the RCpc (Release Consistent processor
  consistent) memory model to better support C++11/C11's memory consistency model.

# What is so hard about parsing ASL?

When I wrote [a lexer for ASL]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-05-07-asl-lexical-syntax %}) in May, my plan was to write a parser for ASL as well.
I figured that I had already written one parser for ASL so it shouldn't be too hard.

At the moment, I still don't have a parser that I can release.
Part of the delay is the fact that I am writing the tool
in my free time and ... my life got suddenly busy so I had less free time.
But the other part of
the problem is that the parser I wrote at Arm uses a backtracking parser
but most people want to use parser generators that use LALR(1)
or LR(1) parsing algorithms.  The "(1)" part of those names indicates that
it uses at most one token of lookahead.  The problem in writing a parser
for ASL is that it contains some syntactic ambiguities that require
unbounded lookahead to disambiguate.
Here are some of the ambiguities I am trying to deal with.

### Ambiguity of "<"

When you see the following prefix:

    foo(x < y+1

then it could then be the start of:

1. A call to foo passing one argument which is a bit slice: "foo( x<y+1> )"
  where "x<y+1>" extracts bit number “y+1” from bit-vector x.

2. A call to foo passing one argument which is a boolean: "foo( x < y+1 )"
  where "<" is used to mean “less than”

Since the expression after the < can be of arbitrary length, an LR(k) parser cannot
parse it for bounded k.

### Ambiguity of ":"

ASL uses the ":" symbol in two ways: it can mean either “concatenate
bit-vectors” or a range used in a bitslice.  For example, if you write

    a = x : y;

it concatenates bit-vectors "x" and "y" and if you write

    a<63:32>

it extracts bits 32 up to 63 from the bit-vector "a".

The ambiguity here is that you could instead parse "63:32" as meaning
concatenate "63" to "32" as though you had written

    a<(63:32)>

This parse would not be type correct since ASL requires the bitslice indexes to
be ints, not bit-vectors so, in practice, there is no actual confusion.
But I would prefer it if the grammar and typechecker could be kept separate
from one another.


### Ambiguity of variable declarations

In ASL, you declare local variables in a similar way to C:

    integer y;

This is easy to parse because we know that "integer" is a type.
But suppose we see a statement like this:

    x y;

To parse this, we really need to know that "x" is a type.  This is a problem
ASL inherited from C and there is a standard fix for this in C: we have the
parser keep track of any type declarations it has seen earlier in the file.

### Next steps

I have had a pretty busy summer but I am hoping that I will get back to writing
a parser soon.

The "<" ambiguity looks like the hardest problem to solve but
I am experimenting with preprocessing ASL programs to use "[]" around bitslices
(the same way that Verilog does) instead of using "<>" around bitslices.  This
creates some new ambiguities around the use of "[]" for arrays but those
look easier to deal with.




### Related posts and papers

* Paper: [End-to-End Verification of ARM Processors with ISA-Formal]({{ site.url }}/papers/cav2016_isa_formal.pdf), CAV 2016.
* [Verifying against the official ARM specification]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-07-26-using-armarm %})
* [Finding Bugs versus Proving Absence of Bugs]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-07-18-finding-bugs %})
* [Limitations of ISA-Formal]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-07-30-isa-formal-limitations %})
* Paper: [Trustworthy Specifications of ARM v8-A and v8-M System Level Architecture]({{ site.url }}/papers/fmcad2016-trustworthy.pdf)), FMCAD 2016.
* [ARM's ASL Specification Language]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2016-08-17-specification_languages %})
* [ARM Releases Machine Readable Architecture Specification]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-04-20-ARM-v8a-xml-release %})
* [Dissecting the ARM Machine Readable Architecture files]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-04-29-dissecting-ARM-MRA %})
* Code: [MRA Tools](https://github.com/alastairreid/mra_tools)
* [ASL Lexical Syntax]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-05-07-asl-lexical-syntax %})
* This post: [Arm v8.3 Machine Readable Specifications]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-07-31-arm-v8_3 %})
